If you think you may have Covid, it is important to get tested. Even people who don't feel very ill can put others at risk.

Does a fever mean I have coronavirus?

A high temperature is 37.8C or above. A fever like this can happen when the body is fighting off any infection - not just coronavirus.

It is best to use a thermometer. But if you don't have one, check if you, or the person you are worried about, feels hot to the touch on the chest or back.

A high temperature is unlikely with a cold.

If you have a fever, arrange a coronavirus test - you can use the NHS 111 coronavirus service online.

What about a cough?

If you have a cold or flu you may well have a cough, along with other symptoms.

Flu usually comes on suddenly and sufferers will often experience muscle aches, chills, headaches, tiredness, a sore throat and a runny or stuffed nose, along with the cough. It feels worse than a heavy cold.

Colds tend to develop more gradually and are less severe, although they do still make you feel unwell. Along with a cough, there may be sneezing and a sore throat and runny nose. Fever, chills, muscle aches and headaches are rare.

A coronavirus cough means coughing a lot for more than an hour, or three or more coughing fits or "episodes" in 24 hours.

If you usually have a cough because of a long-standing medical condition like COPD, it may be worse than usual.

You should get tested for coronavirus if you develop a new, continuous cough.

What do loss or change to smell or taste mean?

These are key symptoms of coronavirus and mean you should get a test.

It could still be that you have a simple cold. But you need to check, even if you don't feel unwell, to avoid the risk of spreading the virus.

Does sneezing mean I've got coronavirus?

Sneezing is not a classic symptom of coronavirus, and unless you also have a fever, cough or loss of smell and taste, you do not need a test, according to the NHS.

Sneeze droplets can spread infections though, so catch them in a tissue, put it in the bin and then wash your hands.

Wash your hands regularly

final class	good
cotext-free class	short
heading	False
length (in characters)	58
number of characters within links	0
link density	0.000
number of words	10
number of stopwords	0
stopword density	0.000
html.body.div.div.main.div.div.div.article.div.div.div.ul.li
Use a face covering when social distancing is not possible
