How many people have died?

Up until recently, deaths in Peru were only reported as Covid deaths if there was a positive test result to back it up.

But throughout the pandemic, excess death figures suggested that the real Covid death toll might be much higher.

Excess deaths account for how many more people are dying than would be expected based on the previous few years.

Since the start of the Covid outbreak, Peru has recorded around 150% more deaths than would be expected.

Following a review by Peru's government, the criteria for recording Covid deaths have been broadened out to include people who died within 60 days of a positive test, as well as suspected cases without a positive test.

This includes people whose clinical assessment or medical examinations suggest Covid, as well as those who've been in contact with a confirmed case.

Countries record Covid deaths in different ways, making direct comparisons tricky.

However, the latest figures out of Peru mean its death rate per capita is now one of the highest, if not the highest, in the world.

The official death toll is more than 180,000, in a country of less than 33 million people.

Why has Peru been so badly hit?

Peru imposed one of the earliest and strictest lockdowns in Latin America back in March 2020 - before the UK and some other European countries.

This lasted until the end of June 2020.

The county's borders were shut, curfews were imposed, and people could only leave their homes for essential goods - but infections and deaths continued to rise.

Experts say Peru's healthcare system was underprepared, and lacks sufficient funding.

There's also been shortage of oxygen needed to treat Covid patients, and the entire country has around 1,600 intensive care unit beds - far less than some neighbouring countries.

Slow vaccine rollout

Peru's vaccination drive has been slow, with less than 4% of the country fully vaccinated.

This is behind many other countries in Latin America.

Brazil and Mexico have fully vaccinated around 10%, and Chile has done the most, with more than 40% fully vaccinated.

Peru has secured enough doses to vaccinate its entire population, but many of these vaccines are yet to be delivered and the rollout so far has failed to stem infections.

Covid cases remain high - with more than 4,000 reported daily.

Informal economy and overcrowded housing

There are also several social and economic factors that can help explain why Peru has struggled to contain Covid cases.

About 70% of the employed population in Peru work in the informal sector, which is one of the highest rates in Latin America.

These jobs are by their nature unpredictable, and mean many workers have to chose between going out to work or not having enough money to survive.

The government has passed significant support measures to help people who lost their jobs and companies that lost income due to the pandemic - but only about 38% of Peruvian adults have a bank account, making quick digital payments largely impossible.

"Peruvians who went out to work had to use public transport, and to sell goods in very crowded markets," Peruvian economist Hugo Ñopo told the BBC.

More than 40% of households in Peru do not have a refrigerator, according to a 2020 government survey.

Many households "do not have logistics that allow them to stock up on food for many days", Ñopo says.

"They have to go out to stock up frequently and especially go to the markets," he adds.

Early in the pandemic, the markets which many Peruvians rely have been identified as "the main sources of contagion" by government.

On top of this, the latest National Household Survey suggests 11.8% of poor households in Peru live in overcrowded homes.

Cramped housing makes social distancing harder and allows the virus to spread more easily.Covid variants: Why hasn't the UK banned all international flights?

There are more than 40 countries on the government's red list, which has the strictest travel restrictions.

One is India, where a new mutation of coronavirus first identified in the country has spread to the UK. This has been linked to international travel. It has been classified as a "variant of concern" and more than 3,400 cases of it have been found in the UK.

But despite this and the discovery in the UK of other variants identified abroad, the government has never banned international travel altogether - unlike some countries.

What are the current travel rules?

A traffic light system has been introduced for travel, with countries classed as green, amber or red - with different rules for quarantine and Covid tests.

Red list countries (which include India, Pakistan, Brazil and South Africa) are those the UK government says are at the highest risk from Covid, and should not be visited "except in the most extreme of circumstances".

If you have been in one, you can only enter the UK if you are a UK or Irish national, or UK resident.

You must be tested negative for Covid-19 before departure and self-isolate for 10 days in a government-approved quarantine hotel.

Direct flights from many red list countries to the UK are banned but some are allowed. These include flights from India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Kenya. The government says this is to avoid potential disruption to critical freight and British nationals seeking to return home.

On one day (19 May), Reality Check counted 4 direct flights from India to Heathrow.

How were Covid variant cases able to get through?

Coronavirus variants originally found in Brazil, South Africa and India are believed to be more transmissible, and there are concerns vaccines may not be quite as effective against them.

British and Irish citizens who have been in these countries are allowed to return to the UK and - until mid-February - were trusted to self-isolate at home and could take public transport to get there.

Prime Minister Boris Johnson said the UK had moved "as fast as we could" to introduce quarantine hotels, describing them as a "very tough regime". The measures began on 15 February 2021, after weeks of speculation.

The Civil Aviation Authority said that in February 2021, 50,000 passengers travelled between India and the UK, which is an average of just under 900 a day in each direction.

The country was placed on the red list on 23 April and there has been criticism that it should have been added earlier.

Just under half of people with the India variant of concern in England had been travelling, according to a 13 May briefing from Public Health England. It said that about one third of the cases were in London and a quarter were in the North West of England.

Positive tests from passengers arriving in the UK are automatically sent for genome sequencing, which identifies new variants.

But there is concern that by the time a variant has been identified, it may already have spread in the UK.

Why didn't the UK shut its borders before it had any cases?

The debate over whether to shut UK borders stretches back to the start of the pandemic.

Between January and March 2020, the UK introduced some measures to try to protect itself from the new virus.

Quarantine was imposed on 273 people travelling from Wuhan in China, where the first outbreak was seen. Others from "high-risk countries" including China, Iran and Northern Italy were asked to voluntarily isolate for 14 days.

An inquiry into the pandemic suggested it was understandable the government "did not consider it practical or effective simply to restrict flights" at that time, partly because there were so many British residents trying to get home.

But these self-isolation requirements were withdrawn on 13 March 2020 - 10 days before the UK went into the first lockdown.

"The government's failure to have proper quarantine measures in place in March as the infection was spreading fast was a grave error and meant Covid spread faster and reached more people," Yvette Cooper, chair of the committee of MPs behind the inquiry said.

One study found the virus was introduced to the UK "well over a thousand times in early 2020", with a third of transmission chains brought in from Spain, followed by 29% from France, neither of which faced any restrictions. China accounted for just 0.4% of imported cases.

At the end of February 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) advised against travel bans, saying they were "usually not effective in preventing the importation of cases but may have a significant economic and social impact".

In April 2021, the WHO said it would update its "risk-based guidance" on Covid and international travel.

What were the government's reasons?

The Home Office said the committee behind the inquiry was "incorrect in their assertions".

It said keeping borders open helped businesses maintain international connections, boosted the economy and meant people could still travel for essential reasons.

It argued that by mid-March 2020 there was "significant transmission" in the UK and any extra travel restrictions at that time would have had a "very marginal" impact.

At a meeting in February 2020, the government advisory committee Sage suggested that cutting the number of infections entering the UK by half would only delay the epidemic by five days.

The scientists estimated that a 95% reduction in imported cases, which would have required "draconian" travel restrictions, would have pushed things back by a month.

final class	good
cotext-free class	good
heading	False
length (in characters)	312
number of characters within links	23
link density	0.074
number of words	49
number of stopwords	0
stopword density	0.000
html.body.div.div.main.div.div.div.article.div.div.p
But at its meeting in January 2021, Sage said: "No intervention, other than a complete, pre-emptive closure of borders, or the mandatory quarantine of all visitors upon arrival in designated facilities, irrespective of testing history, can get close to fully preventing the importation of cases or new variants."
What's happened to infections?

Seychelles is a small country, so the overall numbers of daily infections have not been high - but as a proportion of the population, the rise has caused serious concern.

During April, the average number of new infections remained stable, at around 50 a day.

By mid-May, this seven-day rolling average had risen to 400 new cases daily.

Since then the figure has fallen, but remains well above the average level for April.

The Seychelles Ministry of Health said on 10 May that about a third of the cases had been among those who are fully vaccinated.

Other countries where a significant proportion of the population is fully vaccinated, have reported much lower levels of new infections.

The Oxford-AstraZeneca jab, produced in India and distributed under the name Covishield, has also been used, and most recently the Russian Sputnik V vaccine was rolled out.

Of the doses administered (not including Sputnik), 57% were Sinopharm and 43% Covishield.

We don't know how many out of those fully vaccinated people who tested positive for Covid had received Sinopharm, and how many had been given AstraZeneca.

We do know that about two-thirds of those who tested positive largely had mild or no symptoms, according to the country's health commissioner, Dr Jude Gedeon.

Of those who needed admission to hospital, 80% were people who hadn't been vaccinated, and a majority of these also had other health conditions.

How effective are the vaccines?

The World Health Organization (WHO) says China's Sinopharm has an efficacy of 79% against symptomatic infection and is highly effective in preventing severe disease and hospital admission.

However, there's been generally less data worldwide on Chinese vaccines, and last month, the head of China's Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), George Gau, appeared to question its efficacy.

"We will solve the problem that current vaccines don't have very high protection rates," he said at a news conference on 11 April.

There are also questions about how effective the AstraZeneca vaccine is against the South African variant which is present in Seychelles.

The study didn't assess efficacy against severe Covid-19, but the WHO says indirect evidence shows it could be effective.

Similar concerns over another Chinese-produced vaccine have been expressed in Chile.

Cases there rose last month despite a mass vaccination campaign, over 90% of which was carried out using the CoronaVac jab produced by the Beijing-based Sinovac.

Critics also pointed to the government in Chile loosening restrictions too fast, and a widespread failure to follow public health guidelines.

Were restrictions lifted too fast?

Dr Gedeon, the Seychelles health commissioner, says he believes the rise in cases could be as a result of increased economic activity.

Restrictions were relaxed in March, including the reopening of restaurants and the resumption of school classes.

Officials have also suggested Easter celebrations may have contributed, along with people dropping their guard against the possibility of infection, having received one or more doses of the vaccine.

Restrictions were brought back in early May, with schools closed, bars, restaurants and shops told to close early and some gatherings banned.

Tourism may also pose a threat

The Indian Ocean islands that make up Seychelles rely heavily on tourism. In 2019, there were almost 400,000 foreign visitors.

Following a collapse in numbers during the pandemic, tourism is on the increase again.

On 25 March, Seychelles announced that visitors could enter without the need to quarantine, although a negative Covid test is still needed and entry restrictions apply for some countries.

More than 14,000 visitors arrived in April, far more than in March. But the government has rejected suggestions that this could have led to a rise in cases.

"There is also no evidence that tourists are bringing new infections into Seychelles," said Dr Gedeon.
Coronavirus in Africa: Concern grows over third wave of infections

The World Health Organization (WHO) has warned that the third wave of Covid-19 infections facing Africa could get worse as new and faster spreading variants drive infections.

The highly transmissible Delta variant is spreading to more and more countries.

New weekly cases have now overtaken the highest weekly numbers recorded during the peak of the second wave in January this year. Meanwhile, only slightly more than 1% of the continent has been fully vaccinated.

Where are case numbers rising?

New cases have been increasing for seven weeks running and rose by an average of 28% week-on-week over the past month, according to the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).

The WHO says more than 251,000 new cases were recorded in the week ending 4 July, making it the "worst pandemic week ever".

"Africa has just marked the continent's most dire pandemic week ever. But the worst is yet to come as the fast-moving third wave continues to gain speed and new ground," says Matshidiso Moeti, WHO regional director for Africa.

There are 23 countries on the continent that have so far experienced a third wave of infections, with Senegal and Malawi are the latest two to be affected. Of those, 13 are experiencing a more severe wave than before, the Africa CDC says.

Uganda, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Namibia, Zambia, Rwanda and Tunisia have been among the worst hit by a recent resurgence in infections.

"This is driven by a mix of public fatigue, social mixing, ineffective use of public health and social measures, and vaccine inequity, and the spread of new variants," according to WHO director general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.

South Africa is also reporting a sustained increase in cases, with Gauteng province, where Johannesburg is located, leading with infections.

The WHO says the arrival of cooler winter weather in southern Africa has also increased the risk of infection.

Is the Delta variant to blame?

The WHO believes the spread of the Delta variant (which is more transmissible) has contributed to an increase in both cases and deaths across the continent.

It has been reported in 17 countries so far, and 10 out of the 16 countries currently facing a resurgence have confirmed its presence.

The WHO estimated that the variant could be 30%-60% more transmissible than other variants.

It has been found in most of the samples that were sequenced in some countries which are experiencing a resurgence - for example DR Congo and also in Uganda, where 66% of the cases of severe illness in people younger than 45 years have been attributed to it.

"I'm afraid the next couple of months are going to be very difficult on the continent as we see the spread of the variant," said Dr Moeti.

But there is also concern that new variants can't easily be tracked because the testing required to identify them isn't widely available.

Another variant of the virus which emerged in South Africa last year, now named Beta, led to high case numbers across southern Africa, where it is more widespread.

It has been detected in 29 countries, while 32 countries have also reported the presence of a Covid-19 variant first identified in the UK, now named Alpha.

As case numbers rise again, several countries - like Tunisia, Rwanda and Uganda - have reintroduced restrictions on public gatherings and non-essential travel.

What's happening to Covid deaths?

The number of Covid-related deaths increased by 28%in the past month, according to Africa CDC data.

There were significant increases in South Africa (39%), DR Congo (24%) and Kenya (23%).

The CDC has warned about rising fatality rates across the continent, saying that of the 55 countries it monitors, 21 are reporting death rates above the global average of 2.2%.

A study published in The Lancet suggests hospital patients who are critically ill with Covid-19 in Africa are far more likely to die than in other parts of the world because of limited healthcare resources.

Researchers, who looked at patients in hospitals across 10 African countries, found that nearly half of those who needed intensive care died, whereas the global average was less than a third.

African countries have been struggling with the availability of oxygen, and the WHO estimates that demand has gone up during the third wave.

The global fatality rate has fallen since the start of the pandemic, which in itself would put more African countries above the global average.

Rates are also affected by how much testing is done - a country with low levels of testing will show a higher death rate because many non-fatal Covid cases are going undetected.

This information is regularly updated but may not reflect the latest totals for each country.

** The past data for new cases is a three day rolling average. Due to revisions in the number of cases, an average cannot be calculated for this date.

Source: Johns Hopkins University, national public health agencies and UN population data

Figures last updated: 8 July 2021, 11:22 BST

More importantly, data for deaths should be treated with caution, given the wide variations in how countries record them.

final class	good
cotext-free class	good
heading	False
length (in characters)	213
number of characters within links	0
link density	0.000
number of words	39
number of stopwords	0
stopword density	0.000
html.body.div.div.main.div.div.div.article.div.div.p
In South Africa, research into excess deaths - that's the number in a certain period above what would normally be expected - shows that there were 173,132 more deaths between 6 May last year and 19 June this year.

The official death toll from Covid-19 in the country since the start of the pandemic is about 60,000.

